---
path: "/global-es6-support-vscode"
date: "2019-05-01"
title: "Setup Global ES6 Support for VS Code in 10 Minutes"
author: "Charlie Ontiveros"
seoKeywords: ""
---

**I'm not sure if I should publish this. I made a big mistake. The latest LTS Node release already supports most ES6 features. The only thing it doesn't support is ES6 imports, which most people are going to be doing projects anyway if they need imports. Therefore, negating most of the advice here in this blog.**

Ever ran across some cool ES6 code on the internet you wanted to try and ended up having to open up an existing project with ES6 support or install it?

As an avid learner, I find this very inconvenient. All I want to do is open up VS Code and run ES6 code without worrying about installing Babel or hunting down an existing project with ES6 support.

## Say no more fam'

I found a way to add ES6 support and make it feel like it’s supported ‘out of the box’ by VS Code!

After reading this, you will no longer need to install Babel or open up an existing project just to try out ES6 code.

I will walk you through how to install Babel globally and link it up to an extension called [*Code Runner*](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=formulahendry.code-runner "Super duper awesome VS Code tool"). This will allow you to write ES6 code and run it without needing to install or configure anything else afterwards.

*Note:
We will be installing Babel packages globally. This is definitely NOT a best practice. However, we’ll be doing this because sometimes, you just want a super convenient way to write and execute ES6 code as conveniently as possible. Personally, I am tethering from my phone and so I have to use my data judiciously.*

## Install Code Runner
[*Code Runner*](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=formulahendry.code-runner "Super duper awesome VS Code tool") is a super popular VS Code extension. It automatically maps file extensions to a particular run command. For example, it maps all Javascript files to:
    ```shell
    node ‘file.js’
    ```

Installing Code Runner will allow us to update this command to use Babel when executing Javascript files.
1. Open up VS Code.
2. Go to Extension and search for Code Runner.
3. Install it.

To test it:
1. Open up a new VS code window and create a new JS file.
2. Write ES5 code in it. Then right click anywhere in that file. You should see a new option *Run Code*.
3. Click on *Run Code*. Alternatively, you can hit *CTRL + ALT + N* keyboard shortcut.
4. This should automatically launch the terminal in VS Code and execute the ES5 code.
5. Update the code with ES6 features in it like async/await and run it again.

Depending on the version of Node you have (I only use LTS versions), you may run into issues because Node doesn’t understand all ES6 features yet. We’ll fix this by adding Babel.

## Installing Babel
For this step, we’ll install Babel and a couple of other packages globally.
1. Run the following command.
    ```shell
    npm install -g @babel/core @babel/node @babel/preset-env
    ```
This is a global install, so be sure to include the -g.

## Configure Code Runner
Next, we’ll need to update the command that Code Runner uses to launch Javascript files.
1. Press *F1* to bring up the Command Pallet, then select *Preferences: User Settings (JSON)*.
2. At the very end, type the following:
    ```json
    "code-runner.executorMap": {
        "javascript": "babel-node --presets path to preset-env"
    }
    ```
The default path for globally installed NPM modules for windows is:
```shell
C:/Users/{profile user name}/AppData/Roaming/npm/node_modules/@babel/preset-env
```

For macOS or Linux, the default location is:
```shell
/usr/local/lib/node_modules
```
Having said that, I’m aware that Linux users often run into permission issues when installing packages globally and may need to change their paths. https://docs.npmjs.com/resolving-eacces-permissions-errors-when-installing-packages-globally. If you did this and modified the default path for global NPM installations, be sure you use the correct path above.

### Test It Out
Re-run the ES6 code from earlier. Instead of executing the JS file with node, it will now execute it with babel-node using the preset-env preset. This will compile ES6 down to ES5 and then run it in node behind the scenes. If you need different presets, just install the one you need globally and update the path accordingly.

## Conclusion
Alright! Now you can launch VS Code and try out ES6 code as easily as you would with ES5 code! Remember to install these dependencies locally when working on an actual project as this is considered best practice. As for myself, I use this to try out new ES6 features when going over tutorials.
